
# DOLCE-BIAS An ONTOLOGY OF OBSERVATIONS, INFERENCES AND BIAS
Extension of DOLCE with observations, inferences, and biases

Developed by Daniele Porello with Roberta Ferrario, Emanuele Bottazzi, Ciro de Florio, Mattia Fumagalli

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

The ontology is designed to offer semantically rich formal definitions of biases, coming from a variety of fields such as Cognitive Science, AI and Machine Learning, Decision Theory. To do so, we placed the theory of biases within a top-level ontology, DOLCE  (Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering), cf. https://www.loa.istc.cnr.it/dolce/overview.html

The motivations and the main aspect of this ontology are described in the following publication:

R. Ferrario, D. Porello, E. Bottazzi, C. de Florio, M. Fumagalli. Taming the Sea of Errors: An Ontological Study of Biases in DOLCE.
In Formal Ontology and Information Systems, 2025.

Abstract

In this paper, we present a preliminary ontology of bias based on the \textsc{DOLCE} foundational ontology. The main reason for devising such an endeavour is to make explicit the ontological assumptions behind the use of terms indicating the elements composing a biased outcome. 
Firstly, we discuss what the object of a bias is —namely, the entity that might be deemed biased, which we identify with situated inferences, i.e. propositional contents that can be asserted by some (human or artificial) agent from other propositional contents. We will thus categorise in \textsc{DOLCE} various types of biases as concepts that classify situated inferences. The content of such inferences is then associated with the following elements: $i$) the agent responsible for drawing the conclusion, $ii$) the objects and $iii$) the concepts used in the premises and in the conclusion of the inference, $iv$) the time when the inference takes place. 
These ingredients will serve to trace the origin of what we shall call a biased inference back to any of the above elements, relating some of the biases present in the literature to these ontologically founded elements.


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%


The ontology uses DOLCESimple, a simplified version of the foundational ontology DOLCE.
For DOLCESimple, see https://github.com/appliedontolab/DOLCE.
We add to DOLCESimple the theory of observations, inferences, and biases.

The extension of DOLCESimple with observations, inferences. and biases is proved consistent with MACE4 (see https://www.cs.unm.edu/~mccune/mace4/manual/2009-11A/)

Moreover, we propsed a restriction of DOLCESImple to the theory of endurants, we added the theory of observations, inferences, and biases  to obtain a populated model of the theory (by means of mace4)
The theory is proved consistent using mace4 and each new class of the theory is populated with some instances. 

[To run the proof, plase see the documentation of MACE4/PROVER9]


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

This repository contains:

- DOLCESimpleFOL_full_bias.in   The file containing DOLCESimple plus the theory in the format of MACE4/PROVER9. The theory is proved consistent by MACE4.
  
- DOLCESimpleFOL_ED_bias.in     The file containing DOLCESimple restricted to the theory of endurants plus the theory of observations, inferences, and biases, where each new class is populated by some instance.
  
- DOLCESimpleFOL_bias.o A model generated by MACE4
  
- DOLCESimpleFOL_bias_cooked.o A model generated by MACE4 in a slightly more readable format.


  %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%



